---
title: "Our Technology Dystopia and How to Survive in It"
description: "A script of my TEDx talk."
summary: "We are living in a dystopia. A dystopia without the neon lights and synth-heavy soundtracks that we are used to seeing in movies but a dystopia that is no less dangerous and despotic. A bold claim, I know, but it is an increasingly accurate and justified description of our world today."
date: 2021-01-26T15:55:51-05:00
tags: ["tedx", "technology"]
---

Below is a copy of the script I used to record my TEDx talk which had to
be recorded at my home (with my phone!) due to the COVID-19 epidemic.
The talk was originally recorded on April 2nd or so and the video was
released on June 5th, 2020. This was originally typed up in a Word
Document and I have converted it into HTML via Pandoc to upload on to
here. Also note, I had to cut out parts of the script, namely the part
about the modern office, due to time restrictions for a TEDx talk so
those will not appear in the video. Finally, a change that I would make
now is to no longer encourage people to download AdNasium but rather
[Ublock Origin](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/ublock-origin)
which I have found in practice to be far superior. Without further
ado\...

**Our Technology Dystopia and How to Survive in It**

Pranoy Dutta

Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science

Script of presentation at **TEDxYouth\@TAMS**:
[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k5oTA8PjJ6s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k5oTA8PjJ6s)

We are living in a dystopia. A dystopia without the neon lights and
synth-heavy soundtracks that we are used to seeing in movies but a
dystopia that is no less dangerous and despotic. A bold claim, I know,
but it is an increasingly accurate and justified description of our
world today. Now, why do I think this? I have three reasons.

1.  We are living under the most surveillance in the history of the
    world.

Surveillance- on and offline. Surveillance that endangers our freedoms.
I'm sure you are aware of offline surveillance, but online surveillance
is even more prevalent, less talked about, and less understood. How does
online surveillance work? Well, most websites that are on the internet
use behavior trackers like Google Analytics or alternatives, which allow
both Google and the website owners to track every single small movement
or click on a website. This type of unconventional yet abundant data
gathered is called "Data exhaust". Data exhaust is like the exhaust of a
car, it is naturally produced by us, and we don't really think about it
even though exhaust, when produced in large quantities, is problematic.
Data exhaust, after collection, is then free to be studied or sold. This
data, while it may not seem like it, is extremely valuable, primarily
because it is honest data. People really do click on things they are
interested in, people really do "Google" things they really want to know
about, and people enter far more personal data into a Google search box
than they will ever reveal to some pollster. It is just the case that
when given such large amounts of data, some of the most valuable
insights are those that can be extrapolated without the person giving
the information being explicit at all. Searches like "signs your spouse
is cheating" or a search like "depression symptoms" are both types of
searches that are common but are also very personal and filled to the
brim with information about that person. Searching for "signs your
spouse is cheating" clearly indicates that whoever searched this is
probably suspicious of their significant other, and this person is
admitting this to Google even though this is something that they might
not admit to a close relative or friend. Searching for depression
symptoms could mean the person searching this is feeling sad or someone
in their life might be. Either way, it doesn't matter what we as human
beings can extrapolate from such queries because this process is
automated. Using sophisticated machine learning algorithms, large
internet companies with large amounts of data exhaust can automatically
detect and "personalize" all sorts of services to manipulate people and
generate profit. However, the problem is that we as humans don't even
understand what machine learning models are basing many predictions on
as they are much more adept at detecting patterns of small details
within troves of vast information than humans will ever be.

Another common technique of data analysis that is done on data exhaust
generated by every user of the internet unknowingly is A/B testing. Done
by websites like Google, Instagram, Facebook, or any other big website
you can think of, A/B testing divides the population of people viewing
the site and it shows one group one version of the site, and the other
group another version of the site. It is usually small changes, barely
noticeable if you aren't directly looking for them but these changes
matter. There have been tons of studies that have been done by data
scientists at large internet companies that show small changes to UI can
have a large impact on the behavior of the average user.

![A/B Testing slide](/tedx1/image1.png)

In a study done by Facebook scientists and published in Nature journal,
Facebook, changing the UI of some users made those people more likely to
vote in an election compared to the other group. The power of this type
of large internet platform has led MIT Technology Review to call
Facebook "[The real presidential swing state]{.ul}." This type of A/B
testing is happening all around us frequently and has the power to
manipulate us, to change our behavior to how companies or algorithms see
fit. And that\'s not all, sites like Facebook, Twitter, or YouTube can
seem enchanting in a unique way; "just one last video" you promise
before you watch 12 more. This is because as Tristan Harris, author of
Irresistible, puts it, "there are a thousand people on the other side of
the screen whose job it is to break down the self-regulation you have."

2.  We are in a New Age of Automation and Wealth Inequality

There is a new wave of automation coming soon. With the advent of
artificial intelligence and with deep learning reaching new heights,
many jobs can and will be replaced partially or fully by machine
learning models. McKinsey & Company posits that about 50% of all work
activities are technically automatable just by adapting current
technology and that 6 out of 10 current jobs in the world are composed
of more than 30% of automatable tasks.

![McKinsey & Company automation data](/tedx1/image2.png)

McKinsey says that it is reasonable to believe that not only are many
jobs going to be automated away but that in many jobs wages will
stagnate or lower as a result as well.

AI expert and author Kai-Fu Lee predicts that about 40% of jobs, both
blue and white-collar, will be affected in a 15 to 25 year time frame.
And this sort of large-scale shift of jobs, while uncertain, will
disproportionately affect low-income workers.

This will lead directly to increased wealth inequality and a sort of
vicious cycle. Machine learning models require large amounts of data and
processing power to be made and to constantly improve. This creates a
moat around the business of creating AI. This gives a massive advantage
to companies that already have such resources thus making them even more
powerful. By creating superior products, these companies will get large
audiences, thus providing them with more data to make their product even
better and thus the barrier to entry of creating an AI company increases
even more. Additionally, when large amounts of jobs get automated out of
existence, this sort of wealth inequality grows, both in money and data.
The wealthy will benefit from this sort of automation as it will
increase productivity and require them to pay less wages. Remember,
wealth inequality is a key factor in the power imbalance in many
dystopias.

3.  We are in an era of widespread distraction.

We live in a very distracted era. I'm sure you've seen the claim of how
attention spans are getting shorter and the claims that those claims are
false. My point is that regardless of how long or short human attention
spans currently are, we are living in a world where distracting yourself
(either intentionally or unintentionally) is one of the easiest things
you can fall into the habit of doing. It is easier than ever to get
distracted from one notification on your phone and before you know it 10
minutes have passed. This leads to doing what Cal Newport in his book
Deep Work calls "shallow work." Work that is done with less focus and
concentration and leads to generally worse results in whatever form,
like worse grades or fewer promotions, etc.

Additionally, many ideas promoted today in the workplace seriously do
not help to avoid distractions. Management trends like open offices,
where every employee can see each other and have a beautiful clear view
of the entire workspace as one large room, leads to it being easier to
get distracted by someone else's ringing phone or anything else that
doesn't pertain to you and yet is still able to hijack your focus.
Similarly, professional obligations like checking email can easily
become a large time sink if checked too often or if you put in the
effort to respond to every email you get at that exact moment. Lastly,
the elephant in the room, a social media account. Social media is like
any other tool. It isn't inherently good or bad. But to consider it a
tool is slightly misleading because it is not just useful, it comes with
the downside of having a built-in addiction engine that is engineered as
well as any casino. When considering using social media, one must keep
this in mind. Not only is it a surveillance machine that takes away your
privacy, but it is also an amazing attention black hole if used
normally.

All of this combines to make our world into something that looks like a
dystopia, with surveillance, coming automation, wealth inequality, as
well as a distraction crisis. Any one of these things alone would be
terrible enough and put together it seems even worse. But the world
doesn't have to be this way and we can certainly change it for the
better if we work together.

**Here is my guide to survive in our modern dystopia:**

First, I'd like to show you all a few things you can go out and do
today. Short term solutions that if you are watching this, several years
in the future may or may not be outdated, but I'm sure this will still
be useful to those working currently.

I will first address online surveillance.

Use Firefox (and add-ons)

Web browsers are like a second operating system that everyone must use
whether we like it or not. Firefox is the only major web browser in
existence that is entirely open-source software and is written by
Mozilla, a nonprofit. Other browsers like Chrome and Safari (the \#1 and
\#2 browsers in terms of market share) have open source components but
are not entirely open source so no one besides those at the company can
read the source code and both are written by for-profit companies,
namely Google and Apple. And even the open-source components of these
browsers should raise suspicion.

![Browser Market Share as of Feb 2020](/tedx1/image3.png)

Google has a history of adding closed source components to their
open-source browser Chromium which Chrome is based on. It was discovered
(on the Debian bug tracking system on May 26, 2015) that Chromium
downloaded a software component called "Chrome Hotword Shared Module."
It was a binary that was automatically downloaded and did not include
any source code although it is easy to tell what it is just by the name.

A hotword is a word or phrase like "Hey Google" or "Hey Siri" and so on
and a hotword module is the code that listens for it. Put another way,
Chromium, a supposedly open-source project by Google, automatically
downloaded a chunk of code which is supposed to listen to everything
said through the mic to detect a hotword.

![Chromium bug tracker screenshot](/tedx1/image4.png)

Using Firefox is your best bet currently and not just stock Firefox. I
would recommend downloading these add-ons as well: AdNauseam and Privacy
Badger. AdNauseam is an AdBlock with a twist. It blocks all the ads but
also behind the scenes it clicks every single ad which effectively makes
any attempt for a company to track and profile your preferences with ads
useless. Privacy Badger is a 3rd party scripts blocker. It stops scripts
like Google Analytics running on any of the websites you visit.

![Use Firefox slide](/tedx1/image5.png)

Use DuckDuckGo

Using a proper privacy-respecting browser only gets you so far though if
you continue to use a privacy disrespecting search engine. I don't even
need to tell you how much Google dominates the search engine market, so
chances are you use it. I would highly recommend you instead switch to
DuckDuckGo. Just change the search engine from Google to DuckDuckGo in
the settings, and you can use it just as normal. DuckDuckGo is a search
engine that respects your privacy and is just as easy to use as Google.

Use a Linux distribution

This last short-term piece of advice is admittedly kind of not exactly
short term and may seem at first extremely difficult for most people to
do. But my argument is the same, what is the use in using a secure web
browser and a secure search engine when you don't use a privacy
respecting operating system? Most people use Windows or OS X but both
are proprietary and are more inefficient compared to Linux distributions
like Ubuntu or ElementaryOS. One would think that open source OSes like
a Linux distribution would be less secure than something like windows,
right? But this is false, the open-source nature of these projects make
it more secure as more eyes are looking at the source and contributing
more bug reports and bug fixes. The open-source community is much more
secure and trustworthy than proprietary software equivalents. Using an
operating system like Ubuntu or Elementary OS is one of the most
important steps to take to get out of the sphere of surveillance that
has been built around society.

![Use a Linux Distrobution](/tedx1/image6.png)

Now onto long term solutions. All the above advice is subject to
change. Ten years from now all of those pieces of software may be relics
of the past. But what they all have in common is the shared philosophy
of Free and Open Source Software (FOSS). Software is like a recipe to
make food. Proprietary and closed source software is food that has
already been prepared, and it doesn't tell you what the recipe for the
food is or even what the ingredients are. You wouldn't trust an item of
food at a grocery store if it didn't tell you what the ingredients are,
right? But everyday people trust companies to write programs which are
essentially recipes for your computer to prepare with no knowledge at
all about the recipe itself. You would trust a recipe in which you are
given the recipe to look over yourself and an ingredients list to verify
that it doesn't contain anything that you don't want, like poison or
shards of glass. Free and Open Source software is software that gives
you and anyone else who wants it access to the recipe and is hence more
trustworthy and secure. If we want to take our privacy back into our
hands and not give away all sorts of information to large corporations
and governments the first step is to embrace open-source software and
use it more often.

Another type of technology that I think should be supported in the long
term is encryption. Encryption has long been vilified by governments
around the world, but it is one of the most valuable tools for
protecting our freedoms and privacy. Export of cryptographic algorithms
was outlawed in the US until 1992 and even now there are still
restrictions on cryptography. In fact, in the past, the US government
has gone as far as intentionally promoting technologies and algorithms
that are insecure so that the government can crack what people believe
to be secure channels. A good example of this is the US Clipper Chip, a
chip promoted by the NSA that promised to secure voice and data messages
but instead had a built-in backdoor for the government to unethically
spy on its population. This isn't even to mention the widespread
surveillance that the NSA already does on its population as revealed by
Edward Snowden. A common argument is that encryption helps criminals.
Well, that is certainly true, but you know what else helps criminals?
Smartphones and computers. It simply doesn't make sense to outright ban
something just because it helps criminals or terrorists as those same
tools are the ones that can be protecting the privacy of every other
law-abiding citizen.

![Image of an NSA Clipper Chip](/tedx1/image7.png)

Also, to thrive in our current world, it is essential to be able to
focus. To do "Deep Work." It is the ability to focus on cognitively
demanding tasks. Being able to cut out distractions from your life will
cultivate this skill. One way is to avoid using electronic devices. Only
use them when they are necessary. Take, for example, writing this talk.
My initial stage of doing research was just me checking out and reading
books from the library relevant to this subject. I was able to work
deeply without distraction because I wasn't spending as much time on the
internet or allowing myself to get distracted into doing shallow work.

Finally, I would like to ask everyone to spread the word, about our
current problems, current solutions, and movements like open source
software and how encryption is not just some evil tool used by
terrorists. You know what one of the most common and dangerous aspects
of a dystopia is? It\'s that most people don't realize they are living
in one. Thank you very much.

**Works Cited**

Corbyn, Zoe "Facebook Experiment Boosts US Voter Turnout." Nature News,
12 September 2012,
www.nature.com/news/facebook-experiment-boosts-us-voter-turnout-1.11401.

Lee, Kai-Fu. AI Superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the New World
Order. Mariner Books, 2019.

Manyika, James, et al. "Jobs Lost, Jobs Gained: What the Future of Work
Will Mean for Jobs,

Skills, and Wages." McKinsey & Company, 11 May 2019,
www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/future-of-work/jobs-lost-jobs-gained-what-the-future-of-work-will-mean-for-jobs-skills-and-wages.

Newport, Cal. Deep Work: Rules for Focused Success in a Distracted
World. Grand Central Publishing, 2016.

Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth, and Steven Pinker. Everybody Lies: What the
Internet Can Tell Us about Who We Really Are. Bloomsbury, 2018.

Stone, Chad, et al. "A Guide to Statistics on Historical Trends in
Income Inequality." Center on

Budget and Policy Priorities, 11 Feb. 2020,
www.cbpp.org/research/poverty-and-inequality/a-guide-to-statistics-on-historical-trends-in-income-inequality.
